% Clojure Conj Reading List
% toread, clojure, conj, #pinned
% 2010-10-24


This past weekend, the first (hopefully annual) [Clojure Conj][1] took place
in Durham, NC.

In my opinion, the conference was a great success, and was greatly
inspirational, as well as enjoyable in many regards. I left the conference
recharged with energy to better learn about and help improve the Clojure
ecosystem, and just get more involved. But, that's not all I left with of
course. I left with great information and even more pointers to new thoughts,
opinions and ideas.

I've compiled a small reading list of things that were mentioned in talks. I
also got a chance to (briefly) meet [Michael Fogus][2], whose talk discussed
the influences of Clojure and asked him if it would be possible for him to
make a reading list. I certainly hope he does. Anyway, here's my list:

[MonetDB, a novel spatial column-store DBMS][3]--Maarten Vermeij, Wilko Quak,
Martin Kersten, Niels Nes

     _Abstract_: Column-store database engines are a promising track in
database research to handle data warehouses. In this paper we describe our
experiences in extending the open-source database management system MonetDB
with geo-spatial functionality. The approach taken is to leverage the existing
geo-spatial software library GEOS through the extensibility features of this
DBMS. The result is a high-performance solution using a software stack that
enables future research and development improvements in many directions. In
our paper we first give an overview of the MonetDB architecture then we
describe how this architecture is beneficial for the handling of spatial data.

[The Zipper][4]--Gerard Huet

     _Capsule Review_: Almost every programmer has faced the problem of
representing a tree together with a subtree that is the focus of attention,
where that focus may move left, right, up or down the tree. The Zipper is
Huet's nifty name for a nifty data structure which fulfills this need. I wish
I had known of it when I faced this task, because the solution I came up with
was not quite so efficient or elegant as the Zipper.

[Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement with Everyday Life][5]--Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi

[Computer Power and Human Reason][6]--Joseph Weizenbaum

[Finger Trees: A Simple General-purpose Data Structure][7]--Ralf Hinze, Ross
Paterson

    _Abstract_:We present 2-3 finger trees, a functional representation of
persistent sequences supporting access to the ends in amortized constant time,
and concatenation and splitting in time logarithmic in the size of the smaller
piece. Representations achieving these bounds have appeared previously, but
2-3 finger trees are much simpler, as are the operations on them. Further, by
defining the split operation in a general form, we obtain a general purpose
data structure that can serve as a sequence, priority queue, search tree,
priority search queue and more.

[How to Solve It: A New Aspect of Mathematical Method][8]--G. Polya

**Updates and other suggestions**

[Infinity: Beyond the Beyond the Beyond][9]--Lillian R. Lieber

[The Education of T.C. Mits: What modern mathematics means to
you][10]--Lillian R. Lieber

[The Einstein Theory of Relativity: A Trip to the Fourth
Dimension][11]--Lillian R. Lieber

   [1]: http://first.clojure-conj.org

   [2]: http://fogus.me

   [3]: http://www.gdmc.nl/publications/2008/MonetDB.pdf

   [4]: http://www.st.cs.uni-saarland.de/edu/seminare/2005/advanced-fp/docs
/huet-zipper.pdf

   [5]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0465024114?ie=UTF8&tag=siusdesi2-20&l
inkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0465024114

   [6]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0716704633?ie=UTF8&tag=siusdesi2-20&l
inkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0716704633

   [7]: http://www.soi.city.ac.uk/~ross/papers/FingerTree.pdf

   [8]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0691023565?ie=UTF8&tag=siusdesi2-20&l
inkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=0691023565

   [9]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1589880366?ie=UTF8&tag=siusdesi2-20&l
inkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1589880366

   [10]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1589880331?ie=UTF8&tag=siusdesi2-20&
linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1589880331

   [11]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1589880447?ie=UTF8&tag=siusdesi2-20&
linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=1589880447

