% hifi: hacks I find interesting
% projects
% 2015-09-17

I miss [Hack && Tell](http://hackandtell.org). But, I'm glad it lives
on, and am impressed by the changes made by the new team.

One thing that always bothered me about Hack && Tell though, was
simply that it was so *local*. Local is great. Local is community, but
local is *limiting*. There are many projects, being done by people
around the world that are interesting to me. Interesting to the NYC
Hack && Tell community. Interesting to the Berlin Hack && Tell
community. And, certainly interesting to the global community of
hackers, tinkerers, programmers, designers, musicians, and random
curious persons out there.

Hack && Tell has always been successful because it's been about the
*projects*, and not necessarily the people. It's about the people by
extension, of course, but I never got excited because
[Grant Kot](http://grantkot.com/) presented. I got excited because
Grant Kot presented *amazing* and fascinating things like the
[Grantophone](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JZUKNN9Kmfo).

I don't know how to build a *global* community, and I live in a place
where my network isn't strong enough to even consider attempting to
build a chapter of Hack && Tell. So what to do?

I've considered many different things, even before I moved. Hack &&
Tell via
[Google Hangouts On Air](http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2012/05/google-hangouts-on-air-broadcast-your.html)?
Maybe. Just start a blog? Meh.

And then I remembered something that I had fun with while running the
show---the wrap up emails.  James and I used to switch off on them,
because they took time and we were both lazy, but I always found them
to be exciting to produce. For one, I got to write little sarcastic
comments from time to time, and 2, it actually had a lot of reach.

For any given event, we maybe had a venue that could hold 80-100
people. But, the Meetup group had over 2,000! For most people, the
wrap up emails *were* Hack && Tell!

So, I started [hifi](http://j.mp/hifi-by-apg). It's a high fidelity,
curated newsletter about *hacks I find interesting*, that I'd like to
see presented at my "private" Hack && Tell. Also included will be a
list of interesting blog posts, and, potentially, research papers I'm
reading. I expect to deliver it no more than once a week, with snark.

If you're curious, you should [signup](http://j.mp/hifi-by-apg)! And,
I'd love the heck out of some feedback, so don't be shy!
